Welcome everybody to the Reincarnation
Book Club, especially to have Chris Beig
here. We're just so honored to have you
join us. And just to give you a little
bit of background about Chris, he's
professor ameritus from Youngstown State
University. He's a fellow at ions
institute of knowetic science which
there's several people who are I ionic
people here
um a jet adjunct faculty member at CIS
which is the California Institute of
Integral Studies. He is an advisor for
the Grath transpersonal training and the
Grath foundation
and author of is it three or four books?
>> Four books.
>> Four. Yeah. I on your cover it said
three, but I was pretty sure there were
there was another book in there.
>> And uh like I said, he was at our
reincarnation symposium. And then um
today I got to watch him on uh Heather
Enworth's podcast. So that link to that
um interview is in the chat
and tonight what I asked Chris to do was
to focus on
the chapter 4 which is about the
oversoul. Uh first I want to start with
a quote that is in that chapter and it's
my favorite quote out of the whole book.
It is reincarnation gives us reason to
ask larger questions about what we begin
to appreciate
the true scope of our lives. We can no
longer see ourselves as simply the
citizens of one country or one century.
We must instead come to understand
ourselves as time travelers with
unrestricted passports.
I love that that quote. Oh my gosh, it's
so apppropo for this group.
So, let's begin Chris first of all by
talking about what is the oversoul?
>> Yeah.
Well, when I was writing life cycles,
I called it the oversoul to
differentiate it from the more common
understanding of soul in the western
religious traditions as being the
consciousness that holds
our individual existence in this present
life. Uh, but after I wrote the book and
after I kind of defined the oversoul,
which I'll get to in just a minute, at
the end of the chapter and at the end of
the book, it just seemed more natural
for me to call this entity that holds
all of our life experiences, all of our
incarnational experiences and all of our
experiences in between our lives the
soul with a capital S and just
redefining it as we go. So, the soul is
just that. It it is the consciousness
that holds all of our experience, former
life experiences, life between life
experiences. It is the aggregate
uh it is our larger identity. It's our
truer identity. And so just as our
individual identity may have certain
fragmentation or certain
um unintegrated aspects, the oversoul at
some different stages of its life may
also have unintegrated aspects of its
many lifetimes of its many adventures.
But I think we are moving into a time of
history where we're witnessing a shift
take place in the oversoul. I think
we're witnessing a rising of more and
more of our past life identities into
our conscious awareness.
And when those past life experiences
surface, they bring with them their
unfinished business. And so usually the
first thing that happens when we begin
to encounter some of our past lives, we
usually are working within a therapeutic
context. So what the first thing that
has to happen is they bring us their
unfinished business and we must help
them heal their unfinished business. So
a lot of the early contact is around
healing the farmer life aspects that
need healing.
But as this continues, as more and more
of our former lives are healed, they
begin to be more integrated into in a in
a in a course in in the chorus or the
orchestra or the symphony that the soul
is. Um, and so it becomes not simply a
matter of healing past-like fragments,
but it becomes a matter of marshalling
the extraordinary talents which have
been collected over these thousands and
thousands of years and integrating the
extraordinary insights and wisdom which
has been collected over all this time.
So to me the oversoul is the
consciousness that holds all of our
work, all of our ideas, all of our
experiences.
And I think most of us when we die, if
all goes well and that we don't get
sidetracked, when we die, we return to
the consciousness of the soul. And when
we incarnate, we contract into
individual egoic consciousness. When we
die, we return to soul consciousness.
And we incarnate, we shrink. And of
course, not all of the soul, not all of
the oversoul incarnates in any one
incarnation.
Michael Newton in his book, Journey of
Souls and Destiny of Souls, he says he
thinks maybe about 5% if I I I don't I
think I have this right, about 5% of our
soul's energy incarnates. uh because if
we incarnated all of our soul's energy
in one incarnation, he said it would it
would blow our circuits. It would short
circuit because there's so much power uh
in the soul's energy. So
that'll be a good starting point.
>> That's very well said. And one of the
things that you wrote about when you
were going into defining
um oversoul
um the analogy you you're great with
analogies in all your books, but this
one I particularly love the analogy of
the nautilus. Can you talk a little bit
about that?
>> Yeah, in fact, hold on one second.
I love the images of a chambered
nautilus.
Now, isn't that just a beautiful image
of the soul that each one of these lives
over infinite amount of time
very specifically, very precisely
leads to another life, leads to another
life. Leads to another life. while the
total soul gets larger and larger
incrementally. Now I want to step back
and say it's not this makes it look
linear that one life A leads to life B
leads to life C. And of course we know
that it's not quite that way that I
think of it's like u our lives are like
a deck of cards. We may have 52 cards
but in any one lifetime we don't play
all 52. We play only a limited number of
cards that are dealt that the soul
selects and chooses to define the themes
and the challenges of any one
incarnation. So that it's not that my
the life I had in the 19th century is
the dominant life feeding into my
present 20th century life. The dominant
life for this century may come from the
18th or 16th or 14th century. So, it's a
much more complex relationship than
simply a linear progression. But
overall, there's a developmental
sequence that just spirals out and
reaches
through time into larger and larger
developmental patterns.
>> What a beautiful uh I I presume that's a
fossil.
>> Yes,
>> that is absolutely stunning. I I lived
in Florida for most of my life. And so
anytime we found a nautilus, it was just
so precious. So I that might be one of
the reasons why I resonated so much with
that analogy.
>> Yeah.
>> Then um I love what you said about
the oversoul being our bridge. Um you
say our oversoul is our bridge into the
cosmos. the intermediate spiritual
beings who direct and orchestrate the
higher functions of the whole.
>> Yeah,
>> please talk more about that. That is
something that is just intriguing me so
much.
>> Yeah. Well,
the way I understand it is the spiritual
reality is filled with many layers of
beings
and there are kind of lower levels
closer to the earth. you might think of
as lower levels of the Bardau and there
are intermediate levels and there are
higher levels but there are lots of
levels but of course all of the levels
are
emerge from the universal oneness of the
energy that manifests itself as the
universe. So our our time space
identity, our present identity, as
magnificent as it is, it's just small. I
mean, it's it's a hundredyear identity
at best. But the soul is a 100,000year
identity. And the universe is
multi-billionyear
identity. And the consciousness that's
manifesting the universe is even older
and larger still. So I think that the
the oversoul or the soul is the
intermediate is is a much more capable
consciousness for mediating this contact
with deeper levels of reality with
mediating contact with the consciousness
that is this the species mind. I mean
not not just the collective unconscious
in the form of a passive receptacle but
I think that truly there is a
consciousness which husbands and
organizes the unconscious experience of
our entire species and every species has
an integrative consciousness and beyond
that we have earth consciousness and
beyond that we have a solar system
consciousness. we go into archetypal
reality, vast vast dimensions of beings
who just live on a a completely
different order of time and and scale of
time. Uh like our galaxy, our our solar
system is a very small system. As big as
it is, it's very small. But the
archetypes are like the galaxies.
They're vast and huge and they they they
just dwarf our solar system. And so
if we are going to engage in any way
some of the archetypal patterns of
creation or if we are going to engage
the deeper angelic forms or the the
creative intelligence of our universe,
the soul is much more able to mediate
those types of communications,
communions than our poor, you know, time
space identity. Unless
some people have gone through
extraordinary development of their time
space identity and I think they actually
have begun to embody their soul identity
in their incarnate uh experience.
Yeah,
>> that brings up a really good point. Now
I know you have meditated
um you've done regression work and
you've also done the um uh psychedelics.
Um
>> so talk a little bit about those
modalities to help you bridge
uh to the oversoul and and as a jumping
off point to the cosmos.
Well, you know, I wrote Life Cycles
after I had been at YSU when I started
my career at YSU in 78. And I read Sean
Stevenson and Ian Stevenson convinced me
that reincarnation was a natural fact of
life. And nowhere in my studies in
graduate school had that been taken
seriously. So, I had to erase the
blackboard of everything I learned in
graduate school and start from scratch.
And so I read the past life literature
and I read more the the the spiritual
literature around reincarnation and I
wrote life cycles about eight or nine
years uh after that. Uh and then it took
a couple more years for it to be
published. But at that time I was still
thinking very much in reincarnation in
terms of the story of the soul's
evolution that each one of us is part of
a soul lineage. And
the story of the soul's lineage is the
challenging itself with specific tests,
specific circumstances, karmic scripts
and growing and developing itself
incrementally bit by bit. And so the the
story that I told there is classically
the kind of eastern story that we we
grow, we grow, we make heal our
mistakes, we overcome our mistakes, we
make more challenges, we grow slowly,
incrementally we become more
compassionate, more intelligent. Uh we
harness the abilities that are innate
within our within our makeup which we
didn't give ourselves this magnificent
body. It was given to us by the creative
intelligence of the universe or by the
divine
but it was basically kind of culminated
in spiritual awakening classically uh in
something like enlightenment or
something like uh moka
awakening you know deliverance
uh and I didn't take it much further
than that I was really interested in
trying to sort of ask the question okay
if reincarnation is true So what what is
it? What are the implications for our
identity? And we've been talking about
that in the soul. What are the
implications for how we understand our
children? What are the in implications
for Christianity? Since most of my
students were coming out of a Christian
background, the longest chapter in the
book is the chapter on Christianity and
reincarnation. Is it compatible? Is it
not compatible? And so I go I dive into
that
but I really didn't go much farther uh
in that and uh I had done some about
three years of past life therapy
uh because I did my psychedelic work for
four years. I stopped for six years and
then I resumed it for 10 years. And in
that six-year period I did some past
life therapy and it was that time that I
wrote life cycles. But when I resumed my
work, my psychedelic work and went
deeper in that process, new vistas began
to open to me and I began to have a
deeper experience of many things but
among them reincarnation.
At a good years later into this process,
I had the experience for example and by
this time I had been initiated into
levels of spiritual reality which we
might call subtle level reality. To me
it's like psychic spiritual reality,
subtle level reality, causal level
reality and then at the top for me
diamond luminosity. Subtle level reality
are the kind of the steel girders.
They're the deeper constitutional
structures that hold the whole thing
together. It's like the girders in a
skyscraper. The individual rooms fit and
hang within the girder structure.
And I I was having a lot of experiences
of the human species as a single
organism that all of our individual
lives were nodal points within this
massive organism. And our minds were
fractal sparks within its massive mind.
And of course behind that of course are
deeper levels of the divine mind. But
just kind of taking it that one step
out. And I had experiences where I was
shown that our individual diseases
are part of the whole body of humanity
learning how to be healthy in new and
challenging situ situations. So the
diseases that we had were not simply
private part of our private karma but
they were part of a collective karma
that we inherited. And how we wrestle
with these diseases and heal them
contributes not only to our individual
well-being but to the well-being of the
species as a whole. So just as for an
individual we have the outer layer of
the individual but inside we have the
soul which gathers all the learning of
the outer layer. So the outer layer pops
and returns to the soul. But the soul is
the intelligence that's gathering and
integrating all. I had experiences that
showed me that the same thing is true
for the human species. That
the human species
is composed of all our individual
incarnations, but there is a soul to
humanity, a collective psyche which is
integrating all of our experiences
constantly. So I had experiences of
experiencing the entire species
integrating with the pulse of
reincarnation.
So I was in a a radically expanded time
frame and I in the time that it takes a
wave to break onto the beach and re go
back into the ocean. I experienced a
whole generation
of precious human beings incarnate, live
their life and then return to the ground
of being. Incarnate and live their life
in the ground of being. So it it was
both a devastating and an extraordinary
numinous experience to experience the
larger intelligence that is specific to
our planet that's specific to our to our
developmental process in which all of us
were small parts important parts didn't
trivialize the importance of individuals
but it gave me the larger context so I
began to Understand that reincarnation
is not simply about the story of
individual soul development. It is that
that's true. But it's also about our
species development, the spiritual
development of humanity. And just says
this individual soul gathers the
learning of individual incarnations
and then when it is when it gives birth
to the another incarnation, it gives
birth to it in a more advanced form.
Likewise for the species as a whole,
this intelligence was gathering all of
our learning from 8 billion people, nine
billion people and integrating into it
this massive store of knowledge and
giving birth to another generation of
itself.
So that expansion of horizon
and then I'll I maybe I should stop
there. There's other things I would add
but that's probably a lot for right now.
So I can just stop there and pause for a
bit.
>> That is a lot. And and what I marvel
with you is your gift with words to help
define that experience into words that
we humans can understand. And you know,
just even hearing the concept of tapping
into the species, I could feel it
>> as you were talking about it, and I'm
sure others could as well.
>> Well, you know, as we all were, as we
all are, I was designed to do the work
that I did. uh and we're all designed to
fulfill a specific role in the evolution
of our human family. And so
I guess the gift of gift of gab
came in with uh the passion to uh
explore the world uh with psychedelics
>> you know and this is why we do what we
do. You talk about we must use
consciousness to explore consciousness.
And even though you know you do
meditate, you have done regressions,
you've done the the um psychedelics,
this is another way to use consciousness
by having group consciousness come
together and explore these thoughts.
>> It sure is. I
>> and I want to tell you to me I hope
you're you're all of you are maybe
nourished by what I'm saying but I want
you to know that I'm nourished by being
able to talk about these things with you
because I don't get to have these very
conversations that often. So it
nourishes me to have these conversations
with you. Yeah.
>> Yes. that we so feel that and and um can
you talk a little bit about your um
experience with Dr. David Kleinus? Uh
>> David Kleinus. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Uh I thought that was very
fascinating how he helped you expand
your consciousness.
>> Yeah. He was the chair of the counseling
department and some during some of my
years at YSU
and he taught a course and essentially
um he called it deep relaxation and um
and but it basically was a course in uh
reincarnation
and soul retrieval
and uh so I sat in on and took one of
his seminars and then I did three years
of private work with him. And one of the
things that made David's work uh unusual
at the time is that he didn't some past
life therapists kind of think of former
lives like a tape, a fixed story because
they're dead. And you kind of start the
tape and you can stop it anywhere and
then you can restart it. But it's like
you're you're learning from the tape of
that being's life, the the stable memory
of that life. But David uh his work was
different. He basically
he he understood former lives as still
living entities living to varying
degrees of wholeness, to varying degrees
of fragmentation, deg varying degrees of
peace and harmony or unhappiness.
And when you encounter them, you
encounter them whole being to whole
being.
So you invite them to tell you their
story, to show you their story. And they
they have to tell you their story
because they are the their burdens have
been transferred to you. You're
responsible for working with them. And
so they have to sort of open up and let
you into their life. And it's a dynamic
back and forth relationship. You have
conversations with them. You can explain
how things are different now. You can
broaden their horizons because sometimes
they're trapped in pain which is defined
by the historical circumstances in which
they lived. And it's very liberating for
them to know that history has gone on
and things which were the way they were
when they were alive. It's not the way
they are now. It's very different. And
if you when they show you their pain by
working it with it, by bringing it in
and working with it and working with
your own higher self and working with
the angelic helpers, you can help bring
that incomplete life to a state of
completion, to a state of fruition.
And when this happens, you you liberate
that shadowed soul fragment and send it
back to the light. Uh and just like
happens ideally when they die, but in
this case there was something holding
them back that not allowing them to get
all the way back to the light of their
soul.
Later in subsequent sessions, they
sometimes show up in your work again as
messengers, but when they do, they come
back completely differently. They come
back radiant. They come back filled with
light. And it's what I really
appreciated about David's work was this
was a living consciousness encountering
a living consciousness in dialogue which
was fruitful for both parties. And that
I thought was was very helpful.
>> And so with David, I uncovered about oh
about 12 or so former lives. No one's no
one important like most of our former
lives. And no, they're not historically
important persons. They're just mostly
peasants and ordinary common people.
Yeah.
>> Very fascinating. I I love your whole
description about your work with him um
in that chapter
>> and um and something you said in that
chapter is something I say in my groups
all the time about we don't ask the
universe enough and you made the comment
about uh the soul oversoul can only
really begin to help us if we ask for
assistance.
>> Yeah.
>> Talk a little bit about that.
Well, it's uh it seems to be one of the
sort of universal laws which is designed
u to put the burden of responsibility
where it belongs and where it belongs is
on the present incarnation.
So the the present incarnation has free
will, relative free will, but it has
free will. Um, and it doesn't want to
turn over responsibility for its
decisions to a higher authority because
that what's the point of being you in
your incarnation. So you have to you
have to ask for help. You have to ask
for guidance. You have to ask for
forgiveness. You have to ask for help
from higher beings before those beings
kind of have the authority to help you,
to step in and help you. And that seems
to be something really fundamental about
the way u higher levels of spiritual
reality are allowed to interact with
lower levels of spirituality or human
physical incarnations. Yeah,
>> thank you for reiterating that. I think
that's such a powerful dynamic and um
and it goes to what you were talking
about earlier that the oversoul is our
connection with the cosmos. So
>> it makes sense that we interact with it.
It's not here lording it over us, is it?
>> No. Yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> Um I I don't want to hog the questions.
I want to open the floor to anyone who
has a question. I have a couple more,
but I want to see um Sure.
>> if we have any other questions. Um
>> just raise your hand and we'll find you.
Open the mic.
>> Let's see.
I live for questions
>> in a group. If I give a talk, a talk is
just an excuse to get to the question
and answer because that's where the
juice really lies.
>> All right. So, John Koig has a question.
Let me find you and pin you, John. Where
are you?
>> Hi, John.
>> Hey there. Um, I'm loving your work, by
the way.
>> A simple question. Actually, two
questions.
>> Do I have one oversoul? Do all of us
have one oversoul
or do we have bunch of oversouls that
have a bigger oversoul? And the other
question is the relationship of time.
You refer to formeral lives. If time is
an illusion, how does that part work?
>> Yeah.
Well, I may be wrong on this, but I tend
to think that we have one oversoul.
There is one soul. Now, there might be
an over oversoul, but then we're dealing
with we're dealing with a consciousness
like the species soul, which it is made
up of many individual oversouls. But for
us individually, I think we have one
overarching embracing uh intelligence
consciousness
time. Now that's an interesting that's a
really interesting topic, isn't it? Um
there are some authors who have
encouraged us to think that um the way
that we shouldn't really be thinking in
terms of reincarnation. We should be
thinking in terms of multi-incarnation
that all of our lives are taking place
simultaneously. And it's not a linear
cause and effect. It's a much more
subtle cause and effect between all
these lives that are taking place at the
same time. And I've tried to think like
that. I' I've tried to put myself in the
world and and try to imagine how since I
believe that the whole system is set up
for us to grow, to become more than we
were before. It's hard for me to imagine
and comprehend how that growth can take
place in a multi-incarnational theory.
Uh you you must have to develop some
type of boolean logic or some different
non-traditional kind of logic to imagine
how that multicausality could be
functioning. So in general I basically
don't have not opted for a
multi-incarnation. I've opted for a
linear incarnation with a couple of
provisos. First of all, uh a an
historically let's put a linear a
sequence of incarnations do not have to
occur necessarily in this in an
historical order. Robert Monrose says
and you know his rose book the far
journeys and the ultimate journey in the
Monroe Institute Institute of Applied
Science. He says it's like a circle.
Time is going on a circle and eventually
you develop far enough in your
evolutionary story that you realize that
you can incarnate in any historical
period you want. So you don't go
necessarily 17th to 18th to 19th to 20th
century. You could jump from the from
the 16th century to the 21st century
back to the 4,000 BC. You can move
around historical sequence. But to your
development, there is still a linear
sequence, but it's not in historical
order. So that's one provision.
And I'd make another uh provision.
We usually draw a contrast between time,
linear time, and non-time eternity,
which is radically beyond all time
whatsoever. And that's what people often
I'm guessing John that that's the vision
that you're referring to when we think
of time being an illusion because when
you're in eternity you know that
eternity is more real than linear time
and therefore it has an illusory
quality. But in between linear time and
eternity or non-time I think there are
many modalities of time. One of the
things that happened in my psychedelic
work is that I was initiated into
different modalities of time that I
eventually came to call deep time. I had
a series of experiences for one year in
which I was taken back into the same
landscape and in this landscape I was
all my time moments of my life beginning
to end experience simultaneously right
now. It was like my entire life instead
of being like this, it was turned on in
and I was looking at it through a
through a paper towel tool to roll and
all of my time moments were compressed
and what stood out were the major themes
of my life, not the time moments of my
life. Later, I was taken into
layers of deep time that transcended my
individual history that went into the
story of humanity until eventually at
the very end of my journey in the 70th
session when I was taken into the most
radical state of deep time that I had
ever been taken into. And I went through
the horrendous strip down in order to be
taken into this condition. I was
somewhere, I would guess, maybe a
100,000 years into the future, but I was
in time. I was still within time, but in
different modalities of time.
And so all of these modalities of deep
time
are before we step out of time
altogether into eternity or
timelessness.
So you know those are kind of my
provisos. So I think linear time
actually serves us well. I mean there is
a real advantage just like u linear time
breaks up all time into bite-sized
pieces and an incarnation breaks up
infinite possibilities into bite-sized
lifetimes and be being small allows us
to do concentrated work which is very
helpful for our long-term development.
Yeah. Quick finally. The oversoul itself
exists in time.
>> It depends I think on
it exists at least in deep time but not
necessarily in linear time as we know
it. Uh and I think it partly develops
depends on how developed the soul is
how far has transcended the limits of
space and time. You know again Robert
Monroe in his description of the Bardau
reality
it's a beautiful description and is in
far journeys and in the ultimate journey
he has a real sense of the gradual
unfolding the gradual opening to time
that takes place in the Bardau and I
think we find the same thing in Michael
Newton's work u journeys of the journeys
of the soul and the destiny of souls a
gradual a sense that the bardau is huge
with many many thousands of layers and
gradual opening to larger and larger
horizons of time. Yeah. And I was really
delighted when I I was at a meeting and
I heard Bernard Carr from London and
part of science and medical network and
he has developed a n a proposal in
physics.
That was the first time I heard a
physicist describe
different dimensions of reality
conceptualized in having different
temporal dimensions. It was the first
time I s I heard a physicist describing
a physical model uh that made room for
the kind of experiences of alternate
times or m multiple modalities of times
that I had experienced in psychedelic
studies as basis. Yeah. Okay. Thank you,
John. Yeah.
>> Uh, thanks for your question, John. And
Kim, uh, you have the next question.
>> Oh, you know, I put my hand back down
because it it was covered in, um,
>> okay, I did not see that. All right. And
so, uh, uh, I'll remove the pen. And now
we have Dan Drazen. Welcome. And what is
your question?
>> Thanks. Uh, it's Drezen. And um thank
you uh Chris for for everything. Um
>> I'm I'm totally intrigued with the uh
question of time and it seems to me that
the best we can do is the best we can do
>> in trying to in trying to shoehorn
infinity into language.
>> Yeah.
And so the you know looking for ultimate
answers uh al always seems to me to
break down to you know what's satisfying
to me what will make sense to me
>> and that ultimate answer. Uh but
>> within that I agree with everything
everything that you're saying. You can't
you can't you can't stuff a thousand
pounds of language into a five pound bag
of reality into a five pound bag of
language.
>> But it sure is fun to try, isn't it?
>> It is. It is. It's wonderful.
Thank you. Thank you, Chris.
>> Thank you for that.
>> Thank you, Dan.
>> Uh, anyone else have a question online?
>> Kim's got one again.
>> I Yeah, that that made me think of
something else. Um,
>> okay.
>> I don't know. So, so what I was thinking
when I was reading about, you know, time
and and Robert Monroe's view that you
were citing in in that chapter, but I'm
wondering, you know, part of our
difficulty in conceptualizing this is,
as you said, we don't have the language.
if you know of any languages that you
know do have more of a conception of
that where there are you know I'm
thinking probably more what we would
call uh ancient history where they were
more in touch with shamanic um ideas and
and that kind of thing are are there
languages where it comes closer to being
able to have a discussion about time
other than linear
>> that's a good question and I think
you're right your instinct that we would
want to look at indigenous cultures and
see how they conceptualize
time in their maybe a more nuanced
multimodal language. Now I haven't come
across and and I'm not an anthropologist
so I don't read extensively in this area
so my opinion means nothing here but I
just haven't personally come across u
cultural systems indigenous cultures
that truly have u a metaphysically
nuanced understanding or concept of
multimmodal time. The closest I've seen
is in how they talk about the ancestors
and the the realms that the ancestors
occupy. Uh but I think that's just the
tip of the iceberg. Um just the tip of
the iceberg. Um to me
psychedelic experiences I mean of course
many indigenous cultures have
incorporated psychedelic experiences for
thousands of years and I think that
gives them a certain edge in uh
discussing uh and looking at
multimodalities of time but the
psychedelics that we have at our
disposal now are much more powerful than
those classically used in indigenous
cultures. psilocybin
or iawasa
or peyote. Uh now we have a really hyper
powerful uh systems and we also have
modes of intensifying those experiences
because we have the whole world's
library of music which we can bring into
a psychedelic session amplifying the
effect of our psychedelics which is much
more intense than sitting around a
campfire and listening to someone
chanting. as beautiful as that is, and
I'm not suggesting it isn't, but it we
can open up much more radically and that
gives us, I think, a deeper access into
the mystery of time. So I would expect
over the next 50 or 100 years we're
going to find a a much richer more
evocative way of speaking about time and
integrating time with our physics
because our psychedelic experiences will
continue to evolve and continue to
emerge.
So for me with you Kim it's an open
question.
>> Wow.
>> Yeah.
>> Thank you for that.
And and can I add to that all her
question also what about the Vic
traditions, the Buddhist traditions, the
Dowist traditions. Um you know many feel
that those languages are sacred and um
so I wonder if they there's words in
there that more closely define what
you're talking about.
Again, I'm not enough of a linguistic
scholar to really answer that question.
So, I would have my knowledge of those
systems is based upon translations and
some of the translations may have lost
some of the nuances of their earlier
language. But as I have taken in their
systems to the extent that I've been
able to and I'm not a specialist in
these, but I've been a generalist speak
working within them for all my academic
life.
Uh
the closest I sought of C to something
that approximates the multimodalities of
temporal existence comes in some of
their discussions of the gods.
Uh but even there
the gods so often appear to be almost
like human experience writ large not
sufficiently differentiated from human
experience to really represent
the kind of novelty of concepts that I
think these questions are reaching for.
Yeah. But I might be wrong. We'd have to
bring in a Hindu specialist, you know, a
Dowist specialist and and see what they
would say about that.
>> I hope we can do that at some point in
time. That's a dream of mine.
>> And Kathy has a question.
And then Tom.
>> Oh, Tom.
>> Um, when you were speaking about the
concept of time and and oversoul and
whatever, um, my question comes in,
it it's my personal experience that we
inhabit a multi-dimensional
soul in our current incarnation.
we have multiple experiences and
multiple parts of our souls are
elsewhere in other dimensions and other
experiences at the concurrently with
what we are experiencing
now. Um, so I wondered how and and I
guess thinking further on that it
um
I had this vision in a dream once about
how this was all set up and it it's
resonating with me at this point that
these multi-dimensional experiences are
just one aspect
of this life
and that this occurs with every
incarnation.
So it's so broad, more broad than we
realize perhaps. How does that resonate
with you? That makes sense to me. I
mean, if we just imagine if we have five
to 10 lives uh from different periods of
history and some of them may be future
centuries, not just past centuries and
these lives are psychically alive within
our psyche. uh and they are carrying
time experiences that are not simply our
time experiences. So if we open to them,
it would be like opening up into
multiple layers of time simultaneously.
And again, some of the some of these
beings may have incarnations on other
dimensional systems. They may be in
other star systems. So that the breath
is not restrict is not restricted to
just a planet Earth. It may be even
wider than our solar system. So that
gives us a certain cosmological
quality with respect to time as well as
other aspects. Yeah.
>> Well,
>> that makes sense to me.
>> Um
I'm not sure if I'm communicating and
that's what I'm thinking. Okay. It's
just this life that I'm
uh existing in this moment.
There are multiple pieces of this same
soul experiencing life simultaneously
at this time at this moment.
>> And then from there, every
experience
reincarnation
that may have been had, it's the same
thing. you you're not experiencing just
this one life, this one soul. It's
fragments of your soul are experiencing
in a multi-dimensional way at this
moment.
>> So, I guess I'm I'm not sure if I'm
communicating what I'm wanting to at the
moment, but
>> Well, it it sounds like what you're
envisioning is kind of not a
reincarnational system, but a
multi-incarnational system. And and I
there are thinkers who support you
completely. they think that's the better
way to go. I haven't been able to
succeed in making being able to think
coherently within that system,
right? So, and I just I just haven't
been able to do it. That doesn't mean
it's not real, you know. And so, if your
intuition's gone there, you're you have
good company to think like that. Yeah.
>> Kathy, have you had experiences
with that? Um, and if so, how did they
come about?
>> Um, yes. Um, I've spoken of the Egyptian
mystery schools the uh content that I've
taken and it it's a you do a
multi-dimensional journey. And when you
do this and you cross into this
multi-dimensional journey, you you feel
and see other aspects of this current
soul and you can actually call back all
those pieces
uh to you for what you you know to
establish
um
a more coherent in that journey and and
learn and assimilate some of the
experiences that those parts of your
soul are experiencing, other planets,
other dimensions, other um
realms, if you will, that sort of thing.
And um
>> it again it as I
I I do have an affinity for Egypt. I
hope to go there one day and see what
happens. But
Um and that came from a an extremely
young age about age three four you know
anyway um so it I don't know how many of
you have maybe participated in something
like that or or done this
>> journey uh that is a process you go
through um
>> and
um you know what you experience in that
in that journey
>> um but again It it's really fascinating
to call those pieces of yourself back to
the original soul. See what they have to
contribute at that moment and I I gather
their gathering from me and the other
parts of my soul at the same time I'm
doing it.
>> Yeah.
>> My heart. So anyway, and how it's it's a
um maybe a broader a broader um
>> sometimes I think tend to to put it in
this little box right here when it's
really so much.
>> Yeah.
>> Thank you for that, Kathy.
>> Oh, good. Chris, good to see you again.
>> Good to see you, Tom. and u always
whenever I hear you as you know I've
listened to many of your uh guest
speeches on podcast and so forth and uh
and I I'm always very appreciative of of
what you have to offer. It's I think
it's a great thing when true scholars
like yourself go ahead and you know take
acid trips and really get wisdom that
most scholars don't have you know
>> and likewise Tom I have I have kept and
cherish the material that you sent me
from your own experiences.
>> Oh thank you. Mhm.
>> I in in answer to what uh in reference
to what Kathy was just talking about, I
about oh 20 years ago did a significant
study starting it. It came up with
myself um when I was informed through a
group that I was doing weekly
channelings with for almost 20 years. um
that that some of us, myself included,
have our souls are not uh one entity.
They're actually a a committee of
different souls that have
>> come together for this lifetime only.
And then when this lifetime is over,
they'll go their separate ways and so
forth. So
>> what it what it gives you is a a another
aspect of multi-dimensionality.
>> Yeah. and uh and your life your life is
a is a uh is a crossroads for the for
the past lives of all these other
lifetimes of the various different
souls. It's a
>> it's a very interesting concept. Most
people that I have had a chance to talk
to about it
>> didn't want to hear about it because it
made things too complicated for them.
>> But u
>> concept an aggregate soul.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And it it and one thing one
thing it's wonderful about it is it does
uh
>> it helps deflate the ego a lot because
the ego turns out to be a it shows you
that the ego is really a fiction you
know more than anything else.
>> Yeah. Um,
but I I uh I want to I want to say too
that the one of the issues with language
and one of your great gifts, Chris, to
my way of thinking is your your facility
with language and and and finding ways
to describe these things. But one of the
primary issues and and stumbling blocks
we have is that all these things that
we're talking about are things of in the
infinite world. Yeah.
>> And we are finite. Our our minds are
finite. Our our language is even more
finite.
>> Yeah.
>> And so it's impossible to define
something infinite with something that's
finite.
>> Yeah. and and even to adequately
describe it, you know, all we can do is
>> is point it to moon and and and and
experience it as best we can, which
which I think
>> your work is a wonderful example of how
what a rich a rich suit that can be.
>> So, thank you again.
>> You bet. And yet even though it we may
fail, it's a glorious undertaking to
push it as far as we can and to expand
our understanding as much as we can
through the skillful use of language
even if we have to fall into silence at
the end.
>> I totally agree. I you know I didn't
take you started psychedelics early. I
didn't start till I was 75 and I'm and
I've still got a lot of uh acid trips in
front of me. I hope so.
I'm trying to do them in other countries
so they're legal though, you know.
>> Yeah. You want to keep it, you want to
be lawful. Yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> Thank you, Tom.
>> And now we have Smitha.
>> Smitta.
>> Hi, Chris. Uh, great to see you again.
>> Good to see you.
>> Yeah. Um my question um had to do more
with uh the oversoul as it connects to
our earthly incarnations. Would you say
that or what would you say about you
know the oversoul?
Um
is it is it does it encompass all our
earthly incarnations or beyond the
earthly incarnations or aspects beyond
our earthly existence also? Could you
throw some light on that?
>> Well, I'm going to roll the dice and
gamble here. Okay. Because Who knows? I
mean, really, you're this is I I used to
tell my students all the time, when you
die, you are confronting infinite
knowledge. And so, you have the
opportunity to have any question you
want answered. And so, you want to have
good questions. And I call these
questions for Jesus. And so, this is a
question for Jesus. I mean, what are the
parameters of the oversoul? But
basically, I mean, sort of logically as
we think this through and as I look at
the wide range of people's experiences,
I tend to think of the oversoul or as I
would simply put the soul with a capital
S. And the soul with a small S would be
Crispaceious psychic, you know, entity.
But soul with a capital S is the
oversoul. And the oversoul would include
not only the in my experiences on planet
earth and in the bardau, but it would if
I had had if I had experiences before I
took up my physical incarnations on
earth, it would include those as well.
And so I tend to think of the soul as
the aggregate of all of the experiences
of this individual soul stream where as
far as it goes. I don't see any reason
for restricting it in any smaller way.
Now, it may be the case that for the all
intents and purposes, most of the
oversouls that we would gather in this
room might be filled with earthly lives,
but I bet there'd be some that would
have some soul aspects that would be
beyond our earthly lives.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. Thank you.
>> Thank you, Smitha. Yeah.
>> Thank you.
>> Now, um Chris, I know you're involved
with the Gra Foundation and you know,
back in the day when LSD became illegal
and Stannis Gra developed um holotropic
breath work. I was wondering if you have
been involved with that at all.
Well, I've done some hol holotropic
breath work sessions with Stan and I've
been invited sometime in 2027, I think,
to do a module in uh the gra legacy
training. Uh when they finish all their
traditional modules, they wanted to
bring me in to do a module on LSD in the
mind of the universe, a more radical
kind of conceptualization of the
process. Uh but that's pretty much the
extent of it besides my personal
familiarity with some of the instructors
meeting at conferences and things like
that. Yeah. But you know I think we have
enough time for me to bring in one more
concept about
>> please do
>> how my understanding of reincarnation
has changed not just into understanding
aggregate or or collective reincarnation
but one other aspect
you know the traditional thinking about
reincarnation is
uh you grow you grow you mature sure you
make mistakes but you get better and
better mature you open up your chakras
you activate the potentials which are
built into this psychophysical system
and then eventually you have a a
spiritual awakening
uh and your consciousness opens to the
core foundation of consciousness and you
discover that the essence of your being
is actually the essence of all beings
and so that there is from that
perspective only one fundamental
consciousness in life. But the point is
once you make that discovery, once you
achieve what the Hindus called um moka,
you the the consequence of that is you
no longer have to incarnate anymore. You
escape samsara moka. You you transcend.
And in Buddhism uh to achieve
enlightenment
when a an enlightened being leaves they
enter not simply nirvana they enter par
nirvana and when the Buddha's students
asked him where does the Buddha go and
what's his existence like he refused to
answer he said you wouldn't be able to
understand it but the basic idea of all
the religions of the axial age with some
exceptions for the great masters but I
think the general rule of thumb for the
religions is to achieve some condition
whether it's salvation, enlightenment,
uh oneness with God so that when you die
the culmination of that spiritual
development takes place off planet
either in pure land in Buddhism or in
the garden in Islam or heaven or so on
and so forth. And I I understand that
and I think that makes perfectly good
sense given the context in which it
these religions were born.
We began to make contact with that deep
deep level of consciousness maybe
ballpark about 5,000 years ago. We began
to learn to quiet the mind, sink down,
quiet the mind, sink down and drop down
into the divine consciousness where
Atman is Brahman. The discovery that
Atman is Brahman. And if you when we
began to experience the infinite bliss
of what I would think of as the mother
universe and we're in the daughter
universe when you experience that bliss
of and you experience the sense of
homecoming we come from that we belong
there then naturally
you it develops a theology where the
purpose of life is to get back there and
they develop theologies that's trying to
explain how did we get stuck here when
we started there. And so you have
theories of a fall or angelic fall or an
original sin or something to explain how
we got stranded here. And the goal is to
get back to there.
But that's and reincarnation plays the
part in bringing us giving enough us
enough time to make that return back.
But that's not what happened in in my
sessions. And so out of my psychedelic
work, I developed a different
understanding of what the process is.
There was one day in one particular
session, it's I think it's 38 in the
book, about halfway through my journey,
after a first half of deep, deep
cleansing, I got into a situation where
my former lives started coming back into
me. And I had cleared a bunch of them,
but they were coming back into me. And
it was like wrapping a filament of white
light around a kite spool. And they were
coming fast and furious. Whole lifetimes
coming in. And then it was as if they
hit critical mass and they fused. And
when they fuse it, that fusion created a
single integrated consciousness out of
all those lives. And when that happened,
there was an explosion of diamond light
out of my chest. And I was catapulted
into a state of consciousness beyond any
I had been into in before. And in that
state, I was an individual,
but I was an individual beyond any frame
of reference that I had any way of
understanding up to that point in time.
And then I was given in that condition I
was given a lot of teachings that was
basically explaining to me this is not
just happening to you. This is happening
to every human being on the planet. This
is where reincarnation is taking
humanity. It's taking humanity not
simply in incremental development stages
by stage, incarnation by incarnation,
getting better, getting more whole, more
healed, more wise and so forth. But
sooner or later, there comes a point in
our evolutionary saga where we begin to
actively integrate our past. We begin to
bring them together, heal them,
synthesize them, infuse them. And sooner
or later, we reach an evolutionary
threshold
where all of those lives fuse into one.
And this is what I call the diamond soul
is born. The birth of the diamond soul.
And the diamond soul is simply the soul.
But most of us experience our soul when
we're dead. The diamond soul is the
awakening of the soul inside our
physical incarnation.
So that we when that happens, we are
never tempted to identify
our mind, our soul as a hundred-year
being, but it's a 100,000year being. And
our understanding, our feeling of
compassion is radically expanded because
we have had lives with so many people.
We've had shared lives with so many
thousands of people. And we've been
white. We've been black. We've been
yellow. We've been every race. We've
been every religion. We've been rich and
poor. We've been everything. And it just
all of those fuse into a consciousness
which integrates all of those beings.
But the next step is not to leave earth
but to bring that soul consciousness. It
wakes up on earth. And when that
happens, we become a new kind of human
being. We become a fully spiritual
awake. Not not simply awake as an
enlightenment kind of awake. That's a
beautiful wonderful spiritual awakeness.
but empowered by the full knowledge of
all of our former lives orchestrated
into a single consciousness.
So when I had this experience,
I began to understand that realizing
transcendence, realizing the mother
universe, returning to oneness with the
divine, transcendal, transcendental
oneness is not the end of the journey.
It's the f it's one half of the journey.
It's the first half of the journey of
return. But the second half of the
journey is to bring that consciousness
back into our body, back into our earth,
back into our politics, back into
history. And this is not a personal
thing. This is an entire species that is
waking up to their true spiritual
identity, empowered by the seizing of
their memories, the active embrace of
their memories. And then just imagine
what that kind of species would be able
to do.
What could we what couldn't we do if we
were that species?
>> And there's another chapter in the book
called the birth of the future human
where I gather together all the visions
and experiences that were given to me
over a period of time
which kept on showing me that humanity
is coming into a turning point. We're
coming into a radical pivot that's going
to be a before and after moment in our
long evolutionary story. A pi a time of
profound spiritual awakening. Uh the
birth of the future human. A a a shift
so deep. It's not simply a shift in our
civil civilizational structures, a shift
in our cultures, a shift in our
spiritual values, but it's literally a
shift in the collective psyche itself. I
think of it as a shift in the plate
tectonics
of the collective psyche so that all
children born after this historical
event takes place will be born and live
their life contextualized with within a
much more spiritually awakened
spiritually empowered consciousness.
And when we try to think about well what
will this future human be like? We don't
need to go to science fiction and we
don't need to go into all sorts of fancy
imagination about the dramatic qualities
that this being might have. We simply
have to look at our history.
The divine nature has been just dating
the future human for hundreds of
thousands of years. Incarnation by
incarnation by incarnation, we have been
developing the capacities
which will be manifest in the mature
form of the future human. And I think
the form of the future human is the
diamond soul. The form of the future
human is the fully awakened soul inside
our incarnate existence.
This is not simply it will have a a
profound opening of the human heart.
a rap a radical rupturing of our
smallalness into the I think a vivid
experience of the oneness of all life.
It's also going to be an opening of our
consciousness to the vertical dimension
so that we will be able to take in
information much more freely from this
from the divine creativity from the
divine consciousness of the cosmos into
our life. So it's the paradox is
as long as we are fragmented as a
species all cut off in our separate
little boxes we are cut off from the
great breath of cosmic consciousness.
But when we begin to integrate
individually and as a species, that will
produce not only a healing of the human
heart, an expansion of the human heart
and and a re a renovation of our social
relationships, but will it will trigger
an opening of our collective of our of
our mind, of our ability to bring in
information from the divine mind.
And there is no technical problem that
we won't be able to solve. All the
limits that we are facing now, all the
obstacles where we just don't know how
to solve these problems, all of them
will be able to be solved. And the key
of course is that we heal and integrate
the human family. And we do that, one of
the ways we do that is by healing and
integrating our soul. because our soul
holds the entire human family inside of
it. So just as the world I think is
trying to become one as we wrestle with
global issues that cannot be solved on a
national level, they have to be solved
at a global level. Likewise, the soul is
integrating all of these lives from all
of these nations and all of these
religions and all of these cultures into
the oneness here. So I think there's a
synergistic relationship between the
pressures building in history to become
one planet, one citizenship
and to become one soul. They reinforce
each other.
I think before a mystic can reach full
divine realization, they must go that
through that long dark purification that
we call the dark night of the soul. And
I think before the human species can
come to this radical fruition, likewise
they must enter and un endure the dark
night of our collective soul. That means
we we literally are embodying the toxins
of our past. We are bringing forward the
poisons of all our less our more
ignorant states of mind, states of
emotions, the the divisive ways, habits
of mind, habits of heart. These are all
coming up inside of us and we have to
choose
a more inclusive way. We have to choose
the way of peace. We choose the way of
of harmony, choose inclusion again and
again and again so that we can let these
toxins fade.
Let them go and therefore open ourselves
to the infusion of grace that's becoming
available to us now. that's going to be
coming opening to us. I thought this was
all going to be taking place honestly
when I had these experiences I thought
they would be taking place after I died.
But now when I'm looking at things
taking place around me it seems like
clearly it's beginning. It has begun. We
have begun this collective purification
process.
and not to mention any presidential
candidates in particular, but clearly
there is one particular person in
Washington who is accelerating
this detoxification by ex by welcoming
all these toxins uh out of our
collective psyche. And I think in that
way I hope hastening are turning our
back on these ways of the past and
eventually choosing a better way forward
in the future.
Yeah,
>> well said. Very well said. I I share
similar experiences and visions that you
talk about, so I resonate with it so
very much. And um I was talking with
someone yesterday about the collective
chaos that we're experiencing now and
>> how important it is to discern choices
that are aligned with our soul. So
that's exactly what you're talking
about.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Thank you.
>> Nothing. I'm I'm just one of many
people. Many psychedelic people are
seeing this. Many people who work in
meditation, who work with hypnotic
regression are seeing this. The
indigenous cultures have been seeing
this. This is nothing new. It's just
coming up again in yet one more context.
It's coming up underneath our feet. You
know that it's not being led from above
down. It's it's just bubbling up inside
us in every way possible. Yeah.
>> Yes. And and again, having this group
that we can talk so openly about these
things is just absolutely wonderful.
We're not going to get um burned at the
stake or you know, as not too many years
ago they were. So,
>> I think we've probably all paid those
dues.
>> Yeah. We've probably been there, done
that. Right.
>> Yeah. Now I want to ask you one more
question because you you emphasize that
we need to ask the oversoul, the cosmos,
the universe really clear questions. So
in this moment, what what question would
you want to ask the universe?
The question I ask the universe
regularly is
how can I serve the awakening of the
human family?
How just given the limitations of my
being, what I have available, how can I
serve the awakening of the human family?
How can I serve the healing of the human
family? How can I serve the infusion of
grace into the human family? And I think
it's for example, I think it's really
important that we have an understanding
of the future human. If we don't have an
understanding that nature is building
something new, is giving birth to
something new, then when the darkness
gathers, when the hard times come, we
could give up hope. We could be defeated
and we could think that we're being
punished or we could think that there's
no meaning to this. It's just just life
is cruel. And that's that's why I think
it's really important for us to
understand that our great spiritual
leaders and teachers are showing us our
own future. They're showing us, they're
giving us glimpses of what the divine is
bringing forward on this planet. And we
have to hold on to that vision and hold
on to it as the clouds, the dark clouds
gather. So I that's my that's my
question. How can I help? In what way
can I help?
>> Oh, that's that's beautiful. I many
people in this group share that same
vision for their their personal journey.
So, it's wonderful for us all to share
it in this uh conversation tonight. So,
thank you for sharing yours with us. And
you know, collectively, we put that
question out to the universe. And
I know your life has has expanded
exponentially since you wrote life
cycles. I know mine has in just you know
10 years. I never would have dreamt that
I would be where I am now. So, I feel
like by just our collectively putting
those questions out to the universe,
>> it it creates that channel, that funnel
like you were talking about from the
divine to to show us exactly uh what we
can do to help.
>> Yeah.
>> So,
>> yeah, you know, I sometimes say I think
that the real question is not what can I
do.
much more important question is do I
have the courage to do what I see I can
do?
>> That's where the that's what the real
the hard question
>> just gave me goosebumps.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yes. Uh and you obviously
have stepped up to the plate and and
said yes I can. And we so appreciate you
for that. Um I want to to um end with
one more thought and that was in the end
of your book
you said we will one day complete our
mission and return to the whole we yield
not because we have failed
but because we have succeeded.
>> Yeah.
>> This is not death but the rhythm of
eternal life. I I get emotional just
even saying the words. So, thank you for
planting those seeds in our minds and
our hearts. And
>> when I wrote LSD in the mind of the
universe, I had a a deep sense of having
completed my life's work. Uh but now
there's another stage which is beginning
to open and it's kind of like the
writing the book was the written
tradition but now I'm following the book
out into the world and I'm going where
it's where it's leading me and it's it's
leading me into conversations like this.
And so there is an an oral tradition
that's emerging where where the written
words are enlivened by sharing each
other's experience in a living
conversation.
And I I'm beginning to think that maybe
out of this vital conversation which for
me is focused so strongly on on seizing
the cosmological and the philosophical
implications of psychedelics.
There are other people who are working
on the therapeutic, harnessing their
therapeutic power and other people who
are working on harnessing their
spiritual awakening power. But as a
philosopher, I've been focused on
harnessing their philosophical and
cosmological
power. And so that's the kind of
conversations that that I want to to
encourage. And I'm beginning to think
that um there may be a book coming out
of those dialogues, but we'll have to
wait and see. I've been promised that
it'll be an easier book to write than
the last one. The last one took me five
years to write.
>> So, we'll just have to wait and see.
>> Yeah. And and all the research you put
in before those five years.
>> Yeah. It was a 40-year project.
>> Yeah. Yeah. What due diligence that
you've had in doing that. Thank you so
very very much and we will look forward
to that next book and and welcome you
back to talk about it.